---
layout: 'blog'
title: 'Groups with roots of unity'
date: '17 Nov 2025'
mathjax: true
center_equations: true
---

[This article is unfinished.]

In an [article](../groups-with-negatives/) I wrote in September, I defined a structure called a "group with negation", giving three equivalent definitions:

1. A group $$G$$ along with a function $$\nu : G\to G$$ satisfying $$\nu(x)\nu(y) = xy$$.

2. A group $$G$$ along with an element $$\xi\in G$$ satisfying $$\xi x = x \xi$$ and $$\xi^2 = 1$$.

3. A group object in the category of $$\mathbb{Z}/2\mathbb{Z}$$-sets.

The idea is that $$\nu$$ is a "negation" operation, and that $$\xi$$ is an element that acts like "$$-1$$". To get from definition 1 to definition 2, we define $$\xi = \nu(1)$$, and to get from definition 2 to definition 1, we define $$\nu(x) = \xi x$$. One well-known example of a group with negation (and the example that motivated the article) is the quaternion 8-group $$Q_8$$. 

The group of units of any ring is a group with negation. (For the record, I require rings to have a multiplicative identity.) If the ring has characteristic 2, we get a trivial group with negation in which   . An interesting question (which I will not answer in this article) is whether every group with negation with $$\xi\neq 1$$ can be realized as the group of units of some ring. In the last article, I described how, given a commutative ring $$R$$ and a group with negation $$(G,\xi)$$, one can construct an $$R$$-algebra $$R[(G,\xi)]$$ by first constructing the group algebra $$R[G]$$ and then taking a quotient, forcing basis elements which are negatives of each other in $$G$$ to actually be negatives of each other in the algebra. One example is $$\mathbb{R}[(Q_8,-1)]$$, which gives the quaternions. If we instead take $$\mathbb{Z}[(Q_8,-1)]$$, we get the quaternions with integer coefficients. The group of units of the latter ring is $$Q_8$$, which might lead one to believe that any group with negation $$(G,\xi)$$ can be realized as the group of units of $$\mathbb{Z}[(G,\xi)]$$. However, this is false, as demonstrated by the following example:

* Let $$G = \langle\omega\rangle$$ be the cyclic group of order 8 and let $$\xi = \omega^4$$. The ring $$\mathbb{Z}[(G,\xi)]$$ is additively a free abelian group generated by $$\{1,\omega,\omega^2,\omega^3\}$$, with multiplication determined by the identity $$\omega^4=-1$$. Note that

  $$(2\omega + 3\omega^2 + 2\omega^3)(2\omega - 3\omega^2 + 2\omega^3) = 1.$$

  So $$2\omega + 3\omega^2 + 2\omega^3$$ is a unit which is not a power of $$\omega$$. (I found this example with the help of [this paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.11569) I found online.)



I made a few remarks at the end of the article, in which I suggested two generalizations. The first is to consider monoids rather than groups, obtaining the notion of a "monoid with negation". This is a pretty natural generalization to consider, given that every ring is a monoid with negation, and that the algebra construction in the article would generalize to any monoid with negation without modification.* The second generalization 

\*In the same way, the familiar definition of group algebra applies to all monoids without modification. Given a ring $$R$$ and a monoid $$A$$, we can construct the "monoid algebra" $$R[A]$$. For example, the polynomial algebra over a commutative ring $$R$$ is the monoid algebra $$R[\mathbb{N}]$$, where $$\mathbb{N}$$ denotes the nonnegative integers under addition. More generally, the polynomial algebra in $$n$$ variables is the monoid algebra $$R[\mathbb{N}\oplus\cdots\oplus\mathbb{N}]$$, where there are $$n$$ copies of $$\mathbb{N}$$.
 
